---
title: Type-directed Programming 
author: Junyang
layout: post
permalink: /Type-directed-Programming/
tags: 
  - OCaml
---
{% include JB/setup %}

In this article, I will conclude my thoughts on type-directed programming. 

In OCaml, the types of function arguments and results guide the way to construct programs. Each type comes with a clearly-defined associated set of values. Therefore, for a particular function, the input to analyze and the output range of possibility are known. 

<!--more-->
##Pattern Matching

Generally, the object between "|" and "->" is called a pattern. Input variables are associated with a variety of possible value combinations(patterns) that need to be deconstructed. 

An Example: Calculate the distance between two points. (built-in type point) 

	- let distance (p1:point) (p2:point) : float =
		let square x = x *. x in
		match (p1, p2) with
		| ((x1, y1), (x2, y2)) ->
			...
	;;
	
> when there is only one case/pattern, always use let to deconstruct. (**best style**)
	
	- let distance (p1:point) (p2:point) : float = 
		let square x = x *. x in		
		let (x1, y1) = p1 in
		let (x2, y2) = p2 in
		...
	;;

It is the samw as with nesting. (poor style)
	- let distance (p1:point) (p2:point) : float = 
		let square x = x *. x in		
		match p1 with 
		| (x1, y1) ->  (* only one possibility when matching a pair)
			let (x2, y2) = p2 in
			...
	;;

and nest expression inside. (poor style)
	- let distance (p1:point) (p2:point) : float =
		let square x = x *. x in		
		match p1 with
		| (x1, y1) ->
			match p2 with
			| (x2, y2) ->
				...
	;;

> For one pattern, the pattern match can be placed in function **argument position**.

	(* create a string from the first two components, separated by a space *)
	- let full_name ((first, last, _) : string * string * int) : string =
		first ^ " " ^ last
	;;

**Reminder**: In complicated situation, several different patterns can be used in conjunction to analyze and extract information from an input.

##Unit Type
Unit type is defined for an expression has an effect on the outside word, but returns no interesting data. **Unit type only has one value ()**, this value is called "unit", too. Like other types, one can pattern match on expressions with unit type -- **the pattern is ()**.

For functions which already contain all the data they need to execute, the argument type is unit. Since for unit type, there is only one branch of the match expression, so the pattern is placed in function argument position as follows. (argument type unit can be omitted since it is fully determined by the pattern ())

	let hello_world () : unit =
		print_string "hello world\n"
	;;

Use a semi-colon to separate one unit-valued expression from the next.

	let hello_world () : unit =
		print_string "Great";
		print_string " ";
		print_endline "Man"
	;;

###Assertions
Assertions are expressions with unit type. Therefore, it can be used inside functions to check the conditions of input and verify the correctness of output.

	(* precondition: 0 <= n < Str.length s
	 * returns the nth character of s *)
	let nth (s:string) (n:int) : char =
		assert (0 <= n & n < Str.length s);
		Str.nth s
	;;

>**Use assertions within funtions as part of testing apparatus**. (function **or_pair** is the disjunction of a pair of booleans, it should be symmetric, therefore a funtion symmetric is write here to test **or_pair**). 

	let test_symmetry (x:bool) (y:bool) : unit =
		assert(or_pair (x,y) = or_pair (y, x))
	;;

	test_symmetry true false;
	test_symmetry false false;
	;;

	(* compute disjunction *)
	let or_pair (p:bool*bool) : bool =
		match p with
		| (false,false) -> false
		| _ -> true
	;;
	
##Option Type
An option type, written **t option**, contains two sorts of values, the value **None** and the value **Some v** where v is a value with type t. 

For example, when looking up a value in a hash table:
-- If the key is present, return **Some v** where v is the associated value.
-- If the key is not present, return **None**.

###Example: Computing the slope of a line

	(* type point = int * int *)
	(* slope (0,0) (12,0) = Some 0.0 -- horizontal line
	* slope (1,3) (1,-4) = None -- vertical line
	* slope (0,0) (2, 2) = Some 1.0 -- 45 degree angle *)
	let slope (p1:point) (p2:point) : float option =
		let (x1,y1) = p1 in
		let (x2,y2) = p2 in
		let xd = x2 - x1 in
		let yd = y2 - y1 in
		if xd != 0 then
			Some ( float_of_int yd /. float_of_int xd )
		else
			None
	;;
	
(The typing rule for if ---- if e1:bool and e2:t and e3:t (for some type t, eg. float option), then **if e1 then e2 else e3 : t**.)

###Use an option

	match ... with
	| None -> ...
	| Some s -> ... 

Write a testing function here.
>**Always thinking about how to test a funtion** since writing a computation two different ways typically helps weed out errors, sometimes can focus on features such as symmetric, sometimes can focus on range and deconstruct the function result. 

	(* in_range:
	 * true if x is (Some f) and f is between low and high, inclusive false otherwise *)
	let in_range (x: float option) (low:float) (high:float) : bool =
		match x with
		| None -> false
		| Some f -> (low <= f & f <= high)
	;;

Testing slope with in_range:

	assert(slope (1,5) (1,-2) = None);;
	assert(in_range (slope (0,0) (1,0)) (-0.0001) 0.0001);;
	assert(in_range (slope (0,0) (1,1)) (0.9999) 1.0001);;

